# Diagonosing-Breast-cancer

Using data visualization and logistic regression to diagnoe breast cancer through cell size and shape .

The dataset used in this project was created in November 1995 by three professors at the University of Wisconsin-Madison; Willian H. Wolberg, W. Nick Street, and Olvi L. Mangasarian. The data was downloaded from the UCI Machine Learning Repository. It consists of 569 unique clinical observations collected from the University of Wisconsin Hospital. The data includes size and shape characteristics of nuclei cells computed from a digitized image of a fine needle aspirate (FNA) of a breast mass. There are no missing values in this dataset.  Data source: UCI Machine Learning Repository, https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Breast+Cancer+Wisconsin+%28Diagnostic%29 .

Research Problem
Breast cancer has been a global issue since the 1970s. It is a disease characterized by abnormal cells that grow out of control and invade surrounding tissues. It was reported in 2016 that 1 in 8 American women have breast cancer, and there were more than 3 million women diagnosed with breast cancer in the U.S. as of January 2019. Although the 5-year survival rate is as high as 89.9% based on data from 2009 to 2015, breast cancer is identified as the most common cancer in American women besides skin cancer (cdc.gov). It affects females all around the world, regardless of race.
Our research problem is  how does the diagnosis of a breast mass cell relate to size and shape characteristics such as cell radius, perimeter, area, smoothness, compactness, concavity, concave points, symmetry, fractal dimension and texture?  With our final model, we would like to be able to predict the likelihood that the nuclei of a breast mass cell is malignant given information about these size and shape predictor variables.

Method
In this report we use a variety of methods in the process of building our final model. In our explanatory analysis, we plot correlations between all 31 variables in our dataset, both to see which predictors are highly correlated to the response variable ‘malignant’, and also to see how the predictors are correlated to each other. Since there are three metrics (mean, standard error, worst) to measure each of the ten predictor categories, we expect there to be multicollinearity. Using the scatter and distribution plots, we can further compare the three variables in each category to pick the best metric to capture the effect of that predictor variable category on the response. Based off of the correlations and scatter plots, we select predictors for our first model and run the logistic regression. We then use Wald test to test the significance of coefficients and report our results. For model diagnose, we use VIF to detect multicollinearity and pearson residuals to detect outliers. In model selection, we use best subset regression and deviance tests to choose the best performing model for our final logistic regression model.

Summary and future exploration
The accuracy rate for predictions can be as high as 98% for our final model. During this project, we first looked at the general correlation between predictor and response variables to determine the initial candidates for the model. We then looked at how each predictor behaves with the response variable using density and scatter subplots to determine the significant predictor variables. Using the information from the plots, we ran our first model with 14 predictors. We dropped predictors that were insignificant at the 0.2 level in model 2, and predictors that were insignificant at the 0.05 level in model 3. We conducted deviance test between all three models and selected model 2 as our preferred model. All 8 predictors in model 2 are significant at the
0.05 level. Even though the data has 3 outliers, we decided not to drop it because it should be normal for patients with extreme cases.
Our final logistic model has important applications in automating the detection of breast cancer. This could lead to lower costs for screenings and higher detection rates at early stages of the cancer, leading to a higher survival rate. While our predictor variables are quite technical and medical, the model provides our broader audience an idea of what to focus on or ask their doctor about during breast cancer screenings.  In the future, after we have more knowledge in machine learning models, we would like to use more tools to have even better predictions.
